>> Richard Feldman: Okay, so
last thing I wanna talk about in
this section is path compression.
So you might have noticed that this is
a pretty convoluted route that we took to
answering the question of
what is this type of C?
It's a string.
We had to go through quite
a few hops in the database.
So we're asking it read in this row, go
over there, go over here, go over there.
The more and more, the longer and
longer this chain gets, the more and
more hops are talking about.
And imagine if you have a,
b, c, and then like, d, e,
f, g, and that chain was really long,
and unfortunately, by coincidence,
you happen to be using g an awful
lot in the code down below.
Well, every single time you're going and
trying to do any kind of operation on
that, whether it's just looking up and
trying to do type inference, honestly,
what is the value of g right now?
That's the thing that,
as we will see in the next section,
happens a lot when you're doing more
advanced forms and type inference.
You don't really wanna be doing all these
hops every single time that really,
really can slow down the compiler.
So this is where path
compression comes in.
Now, I mentioned earlier on that the data
structure that people call this is often
called Union Find.
The reason that they call it Union Find is
because that's also the name of this path
compression strategy.
It's a data structure that is designed to
have this form of path compression done on
it that we're about to talk about.
So, path compression, very simple idea.
It basically relies on a property of
our type system, which we'll talk about
in a sec, which basically says, okay,
if I'm asking what is the type of 3?
I wanna go ask it, is it okay?
Right here, it says, 0h,
I need to go look at 2.
Great, no problem.
We go look at 2, and then 2 says go see 0,
and I say, all right, all right,
well, hang on a sec.
If I had to go through a hop to go to 2
and 2 just pointed me to 0, fool me twice,
shame on me.
I'm not gonna do that work again.
I'm just gonna change my database value
right now, while I'm in the middle of
traversing my path and say from now on,
I point straight to 0.
I am not doing this middleman nonsense.
Anytime you ask, what is value of 3?
I'm gonna go straight to 0.
Now, this optimization relies
on the type system property that
we're not doing subtyping.
If you're doing subtyping,
this doesn't work.
Because in subtyping, you can potentially
have relationships where you're saying,
yeah, I'm a subset of this and
maybe I can change,
or maybe that thing can change in the
future as we learn more about the types.
But this is basically saying,
in the Hindley Miller system,
this is like saying there's no
point to maintaining this link.
This is just useless information.
It is always going to be the case, the way
that these relationships are done in
this type inference system,
that it's always safe to say,
I can compress my path
from two hops down to one.
As soon as I know that I'm going to hop
to you and you're going to hop to 0,
I will never get burned by
just hopping directly to 0 and
changing myself to always do that.
So this is how Henley Milner is able
to be a fast type inference algorithm,
is by doing stuff like this.
We were talking about Chris Lattner
earlier, and one of the things he said to
me on the podcast, which I also was asked,
what's the name of the podcast?
It's Software Unscripted,
if you wanna see the actual interview.
One of the things he mentioned was
that when they were doing Swift,
they actually did use Henley Miller
type inference with Swift.
But they also added a bunch
of other features in part for
like Objective C compatibility that did
involve some like subtyping things, and
they got some really bad
performance characteristics.
To make a long story short, they were not
able to rely on this property because of
some other design decisions
they made in the type system.
So fortunately, for our purposes, and
also Elvis's, and also Rock's, and
also Haskell's, we are able to make
this optimization and say yeah,
we can compress this path out of this,
and of course, we can keep doing it.
So, as soon as you ask 0 what its type is,
it's, I don't know, go ask number 1, and
then 1 says, I'm a string.
So fine, fine point me straight to 1.
I'm just gonna keep doing this until
you get me to a concrete type, and
then I'm gonna stop.
So you can go all the way and
say we're not even to keep one sim link,
we're gonna go all the way to string and
go straight to a concrete type.
The main reason not to do that is that
you can get concrete types that are much
bigger than string you can imagine,
we talked about a hypothetical type that's
like, I have an object type, and I have 16
fields, and 3 of those or more objects.
And you one of those is an array,
which has even more,
you can have some pretty big type
entries on this column of the database.
And so the nice thing about sort
of compacting the path down to
one hop is that it's never
gonna get out of control.
You're gonna have that most one hop, but
you're also not paying the cost of or
like being priced into copying
a potentially very large type
around every single time you
finish doing this compression.
You could also, if you wanted to,
it's your compiler.
If you want, you could strike
a middle ground where you say, well,
we have a heuristic and types of
a certain size, we will just do that so
we don't even have one hop, or
maybe string is one of those.
But I think most compilers will just kind
of just do it down to one hop and be like,
okay, we've solved
the pathological problem.
We're not gonna micro-optimize it down.
If it's a string, then we go straight
to concrete and remove that last hop.
It's mainly about moving the pathological
explosion that can happen if you don't do
any path compression.
Okay, yeah, so the technique that allows
us to do this is unification rather
than subtyping, and the whole next
section is gonna be about unification.
So don't worry if you don't
know what that term means,
because we're gonna talk
about it at length.
Yes, concrete example of
where this is useful.
So let's just walk through very
briefly the example of editor tooling.
Let's say I've got my very nice editor,
and I literally want to know,
what is the inferred type of c?
This is not an academic
learning question anymore.
I'm like, I got my mouse over that c.
I don't have any type annotations.
I would really like if my editor just
displayed that is a string for me,
because I wanna know.
So now we know basically
how that would work.
We're only missing one ingredient here,
which is just how do you find
the source position of c?
And this is one other example of
where it's really useful if in your
parse tree nodes and
whatnot, you've been writing down your
source code positions, because now,
the editor can say, hey, we're at offset,
I'm gonna make up a number 56, right?
That's what the index is of this.
Or maybe they give it to you in lines and
columns, you can translate it back,
it's fine,
because we still have the source code.
So we can translate that into a source
code position, and then at that point,
we can go through our list of tokens,
be like, aha,
this is the one that has that position.
I found it, great.
So now we've got our token,
and then parse tree node,
because we would have converted from
tokens to parse tree nodes already.
So we go through our parse tree and
then we're like, aha,
here's the one that has that position.
Good thing, we wrote it down.
So now that we know the parse tree node,
we also connected the parse tree node to
the types database by writing down the ID
of the of the type in our parse tree node.
So now we can just go to
the parse tree node and
be like, I found the parse tree
node that's at this position.
That one is the one that corresponds to c.
That thing's type ID is 3,
great, no problem.
Just go look that up in the database and
now we have the answer, boom,
c is a string.
And that's how the editor can do that.
So if you were writing a language server,
for example, or
any kind of editor extension that wanted
to give this feature of hover to show me
the inferred type,
this is one way you could do that.
There's, again,
a very deep rabbit hole of caching and
different architectures you can
do to affect performance of this.
But the point is that this is
a fully working absolutely,
totally valid way to do this, that you can
do to using the things we just learned.
Okay, so previously we talked about
this theme of traversing input,
generating output, lexing,
parsing, and then naming.
Now we are introducing a new step
after naming, which is inference.
Now you notice I also dropped off,
previously we had a code gen,
which was the formatting step.
We are for the next several sections of
this course, are gonna ignore code gen.
And we're gonna get back to it with
the very last section when we're
gonna do not cod gen to formatting
style to more JavaScript, but
rather code gen to WebAssembly.
But between now and then, we're really
just gonna be hanging out in the, okay,
Leling, parsing, naming, and
then type inference on top of that, and
we're gonna get into more and
more type inference scenarios.
And let me tell you, the type inference
is a very, very deep rabbit hole,
very large iceberg.
We're gonna cover, I think, the most
interesting and useful parts of it.
But we could do a whole other workshop day
just on edge cases and stuff that we're
not choosing to implement just within
a thing, let alone other type systems.
So very, very deep rabbit hole there,
but lots to learn.
Okay, to summarize everything
we talked about in Part 3.
We talked about type variables, which I'm
choosing to call type IDs, but again,
in the literature, you're gonna
see them called type variables.
So I do wanna call that out.
And then also when we get to polymorphism,
you'll understand why actually variables,
maybe not the most beginner-friendly, but
actually is a totally logical name for
them.
Type relationships, so this is where we
did the sim linking thing where we were
saying we all these constants and the
actual entry in the database table is not.
I have this type that I've
already figured out, but rather,
I have whatever type that thing has.
And maybe by the end of all
this inference process,
you'll be able to ask me what I am and
I'll go ask them, and
one thing will lead to another, and
then I'll have a concrete answer for you.
And finally, path compression,
which is the algorithm that allows us to
do all this sort of bouncing around and
hopping between different database
entries, and yet keep the performance
manageable by compressing the number of
hops all the way up from however many it
was down to one every time we were
traversing one of these chains.
So you only ever have to traverse that big
chain once and actually, since they're all
doing path compression, in practice,
they end up being pretty compact.